+++
date = "2010-02-04T00:00:00Z"
title = "Can you teach me how to make computer games?"
+++

I was asked recently by a friend to teach his son — we’ll call him
Marcus — how to program. Like many children (and many to follow)
Marcus _just wanted to make games_. In this instance, I thought of
Python and the [PyGame](http://www.pygame.org/) library for it’s
breadth and quality of documentation. Sadly, I still needed to teach
him the basics of programming and Python isn’t as forgiving to
beginners as I’d like.

My challenge was trying to keep things fun, while still learning how
to program. Over the years I’ve read numerous technical books, but
none compare to the accessibility of
[Why’s (poignant) Guide to Ruby](http://mislav.uniqpath.com/poignant-guide/)
when it comes to understanding the mindset of a language. The bonus of
this would be that a lot of the knowledge learnt would be transferable
to Python as well.

### Learning to program was a secondary aim

When I learn a new programming language I tend to read a book or a set
of tutorials end-to-end, completing every exercise and example until I
understand it. In comparison, the poignant guide reads like a story
rather than sticking to technical examples. You’re taken through
different landscapes with bacon-craving foxes, granny bombers and
floating whales. While you’re laughing at chunky bacon jokes you’ve
already learnt the basics of instance variables, class methods and
method arguments. The beauty of the poignant guide starts to shine
through when you see the beautiful comics. At first they seem messy,
but the style adds to the stories making for a much more compelling
learning experience.

As a side not, while I find the comics endearing I can understand why
many programmers would be put off. If you’d like to get started with
Ruby quickly and are confident in your core computer science knowledge
this might not be the book for you, but if you’re a beginner or are
about to teach someone the basics this might be a great choice. As an
alternative, you might be better off trying the
[pick-axe book for Ruby](http://www.pragprog.com/titles/ruby/programming-ruby).

### Hello World!

We both breezed through the poignant guide within a day, allowing
enough time (another day) for me to try and apply some of the
knowledge to Ruby and gaming. We both sat down and started to build a
basic text adventure game and began by typing out some of the common
features of the game. It’s a puzzle game where a _player_ moves
through different _rooms_ fighting _demons_ by **farting on them**. I
initially spent an hour building out the classes for each of the
objects in the game explaining why this is useful, after which we
switched seats and I helped with any unknowns. Some of the programmers
out there might call this **pair programming**.

Marcus was a great student and was able to get the game finished in
less time than I expected. Probably the most enjoyable part of using
the poignant guide to teach programming was that I didn’t have to
state “use an array” and get a confused look back. Instead I would
refer to the different components as they were laid out in the
stories, such as caterpillars (arrays) and loud words (destructive
methods).

### Where do we go from here?

It looks like I’ll be heading back next weekend to add to the core
Ruby knowledge. My aim is for Marcus to be using Python and PyGame by
March and I’ll start teaching some simple habits to make the switch as
smooth as possible — whitespace is probably going to be the first of
these.

If you’re ever asked to teach someone how to program I can’t emphasise
enough how useful the poignant guide will prove to be. In addition,
using Ruby meant that the usual traps that most new programmers fall
into — forgetting semi-colons, curly braces and brackets — never see
the light of the day.

If possible, I’ll try to follow this blog post up and track Marcus’s
progress. Should he also consent I might put some of the source code
up should you wish to get a better idea of how a text adventure game
could be laid out in
Ruby. [Chunky Bacon!](http://mislav.uniqpath.com/poignant-guide/book/chapter-3.html#section2)
