+++
date = "2010-01-22T00:00:00Z"
title = "Working to constraints"
aliases = ["working-to-constraints"]
+++

I’ve been reading the 37signals [SVN blog](http://37signals.com/svn/)
for a while now, but a
[recent talk](http://ecorner.stanford.edu/authorMaterialInfo.html?mid=2334)
by <abbr title="David Heinemeier Hansson">DHH</abbr> really got me
thinking. In it he speaks to a group of Stanford students and explains
why they need to _Unlearn their MBA_. In this post I take some of the
topics that he discusses and throw in my own opinion.

As a side note: It’s interesting to consider how many people’s
professional lives have been shaped by the software framework that DHH
released to the world. While many argue that 37signals needs to be
more open about their business figures and research methods, it’s
impossible to negate how they’ve created jobs (growing the industry?)
without ever dilluting their revenue.

I recently graduated (June 2009) from University and luckily it hasn’t
been very difficult to find work – either full-time or freelance. The
tech industry seems to be one of the few that saw a boost during the
recession. Whilst many were being laid off from work, those same
companies sought expertise in building systems to automate and
streamline as many tasks as possible. As a result, there are much more
tech jobs than a few years ago and many of my friends who work in
recruitment can attest to this. Gone (hopefully) are the days where
candidates have to outright lie on their job applications and instead
are chosen on their ability to create. Whether it be open-source
projects, personal websites or even public repositories, there are a
number of ways that a new computer science graduate can show their
worth.

DHH takes this one step further and claims that it’s an opportune time
for any new start-up (business) to gain traction. The reason given is
that when the economy is steady, consumers are more likely to go with
the tried and tested (read: expensive) option, but when they’re in a
recession there’s a greater chance of trying out new products and
services. With this in mind, should any graduate have difficulty
finding a job, perhaps it’s time to start on that business idea
they’ve had for some time? Rather than plan out how they’re going to
run this new business, they should just **do it**.

Planning out the next five years of a small business is clearly just
harmful guessing. A significant change will happen when the business
starts to **get things done**, not by planning for them. Spending time
procrastinating and pretending to work is never going to help anyone
and is going to be especially detrimental to any employees of the
small business. Small business owners need to stop relying on fancy
projections to save them from their bank managers. Instead an emphasis
on completing tasks and helping employees needs to be made. </rant>

It’s very rare that a company is an overnight success and in a few
cases, the business may have just been working it’s way up to release
for some time. However, unlimited time and money never lead to great
products. By limiting the amount of time you have to go live, it’s
likely that you can strip out any extra noise from the product/service
and produce early iterations that will be indicative to it’s core
features and/or functionality. In short: great, simple products!

Personally, I’ve found limiting the amount of time I spend learning
new languages has forced me to concentrate more in that short period
of time and has accelerated my learning to no end. In addition to
this, I recommend anyone learning a new programming language to
combine their progress with the problems at
[Project Euler](http://projecteuler.net/). I’ve found it interesting
learning how different languages treat the same set of problems and am
indebted to that community for their comprehensive break-downs of
elegant solutions.
